date: 2015-10-27

# On mindfulness

Usually my mind is so stressed that I'm unable to concentrate on anything. My
attention is chaotic. Background thoughts, such as reflection and doubts,
constantly get in a way of foreground thoughts, which affects my outer
interaction (cognition, speech, reactions, etc). In particular, it makes it hard
for me to effectively consume  information: not much of what I read in a book
actually gets into my mind; as result I fall asleep in 5 min after starting to
read in bed. When I talk to a person, I may be thinking of something else at the
same time, and I have only one brain so it negatively affects the quality of the
conversion; I don't always have something to respond because I might be thinking
of something else. I'm not proud of it.

So today I tried to practice mindfulness by just watching a fountain in our
apartment community. Apparently it is hard to keep the attention on the water
flows and not to think of anything else. Attention kept flying away to matters
of my concerns, fears, doubts, etc; and I kept moving it back to the fountain.

Then an interesting thing happened. Just as Chad-Meng said in his [talk][talk],
the resolution of the picture has increased as I kept concentrating on the
present moment. I started to distinguish sounds of water coming out of the pipe
from the sounds of the falling water. They are actually deferent because water
comes from the pipe evenly but falls non-evenly. I also became calmer.

Tonight, for the first time for a long period of time, I didn't fall asleep
while reading a book in bed. The book was [Search Inside Yourself][book] by a
mindful Googler. I think the quality of the information ingestion increased too:
background thoughts mostly didn't get in a way. Sometimes they did and I
deliberately brought my attention back to the book, and reread the paragraph so
nothing is missed.

I feel delighted.

[book]: https://books.google.com/books/about/Search_Inside_Yourself.html?id=TeU90XUYAUAC&printsec=frontcover&source=kp_read_button&hl=en&output=reader&pg=GBS.PP1
[talk]: https://youtu.be/r8fcqrNO7so
